>> Kyle Simpson: So
back to the candy factory.
You've been thinking about this for
a while and
you think you've come up
with a brilliant solution.
I don't need to change
anything about the machines.
All I need to do is wrap one nice little
clean box around the whole setup.
Just make one nice big box that's
wrapped all the way around all those
internal machines.
And on the inside, there'll be a nice
access panel where I can open it up and
get it all the machines and wires and
buttons if I, the engineer,
need to work with it.
But the factory workers just have one on,
off switch.
They have one input valve at the top
where they pour stuff in and
out from the bottom comes the candy
wrapped and nice, ready to go.
And you're thinking to yourself
this is the best of both
worlds because the factory workers
only care about input and output.
But I, the engineer,
I care about how it gets done.
What have I done?
I've created an abstraction for
my composition, all right?
I've wrapped it in a function.
That's what this big box is conceptual.
You implement this solution, and
then you get some feedback from the boss.
He says, all the factory workers love it.
They think it's great.
Every day they're coming in,
they're telling us how easy
it is to push the buttons and
our other maintenance engineers can open
up the access panel whenever they need.
And it's all nice and
great job, great solution.
Six months go by, everything's been
humming along nicely and the boss comes up
to you one day and says I've got
another problem I need you to solve.
This is a very needy boss, right,
got a lot of problems for you to solve.
That's good job security anyways.
All right, so he's got another job for
you to solve, another problem.
You see, what we've noticed is
that our competitors are able to
come up with new kinds of
candy almost on a daily basis.
They try out one kinda candy one day and
the next day they're producing
an entirely different kinda candy.
It's amazing how quickly they can
just spin out new kinds of candy.
And we're not able to keep up
with all the different kinda
experimentation that they're doing.
We just only produce the one
kinda candy over and over again.
And we've tried, we've experimented, but
it's too slow to make these single boxes
with all these machines configured.
Can you come up with some way for
us to do this more efficiently?
For us to make these machines
that make our candy for
us, we want to make them more efficiently.
Without even realizing it,
the boss is asking you the most
ludicrous thing of all.
He's saying, could you make me
a machine that makes machines?
>> Kyle Simpson: A machine that
takes machines as inputs and
outputs other machines.
Could you make me something like that?
Go invent it.
This is a real head scratcher.
It's gonna take a while to
try to invent that, okay?
But you'll work on it.
Let's switch back to the code.
We've been thinking about that
shipping rate calculation, and
it's been going along fine, and
then somebody else in the company says,
we actually have different
kinds of shipping rates.
We have international shipping rate,
we have domestic shipping rate,
we have express shipping rate,
and overnight shipping rate.
But everywhere we keep defining
all these different functions is
cluttering up our code.
Could you make it easier for us to
define these shipping rate functions?
So you, the programmer, think well sure,
because there's a pattern involved in
defining each of these functions, which is
that each of the shipping rate functions
takes a different set of three
functions and calls them in succession.
So you think to yourself,
I'll just make myself a utility.
And maybe I'll call this compose three.
It takes three functions fn3(fn2(fn1.
I'll explain why that
ordering in just a moment.
It takes those three functions and
it produces a new function, which we'll
call each one of those in succession.
First one gets the input value.
Output of that becomes
the input to the next.
And the output of that
is finally returned.
And you notice now that
you can just define
as many shipping rate
functions as you want.
You make the original shipping rate
function like this, but later you might
say the international shipping rate,
and instead of saying- 2, you say- 1.
And instead of saying triple,
you say quadruple.
You just pass in different functions, and
you get a different shipping
rate function as a result.
>> Kyle Simpson: Can you see why the
definition of shipping rate on line five,
not only is it point free,
but it's more declarative?
It says to somebody who
knows what composition is,
I know that it's going to go in order.
I know that it's going to go in order,
from right to left.
It's first gonna call passing
any input to increment.
Then it's gonna pass the input to triple,
then it's gonna pass the input to- 2, and
finally it's gonna return the result.
>> Kyle Simpson: Functional programmers
know that a composition works exactly
like that.
If you have a list of functions, it will
execute them in right to left order,
passing the output of each one
as the input of the next, and
finally giving you that result.
And what we see here now is that
composition is declarative data flow.
It is the flow of data through
a series of operations
defined declaratively
rather than imperatively.
Here is why this is so critical.
Your programs don't mean anything
if they don't mean data flow.
The whole point of your program is
to have data coming in, doing stuff,
and then going back out.
So your entire program is
a series of data flows.
It's a series of state
transition managed data flows.
And the functional programmer knows if
that's what our programs are about,
then I should declare my
data flows in a clear and
obvious way rather than having
my data flows implicitly linked.
This function calls this one,
who calls this one, who calls this one.
Anybody got an application like that
where functions call each other all
over the place?
Tracking the data flow is
pretty difficult, isn't it?
How easy is it to track
the data flow on line 6?
It's as easy as going from right to left,
isn't it?
Composition is so
critical to functional programming
because the entire point of your
program is to have data flow.
This is how we make it declarative.
That compose three utility, by the way,
that I invented for the purposes of this
discussion, there's a general form of
that, which we'll get to later, and
it's just called compose, and
it takes any number of functions.
So you could compose one or
two or five or 100.
It's a general compose utility and
it's provided by all your favorite
functional programming libraries.